[CCM] add AWS metric and tag source documentation (#21284)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/cloud_cost_management/aws.md

**Note:** Data can take up to 48 to 72 hours after setup to stabilize in Datadog.

## Cost types

Visualize your ingested data using out-of-the-box cost types. Cloud cost metric names contain various terms that describe how they are calculated.

### Amortized vs. unblended costs

> **Amortized** cost metrics distribute some pre-payments (like up-front savings plans fees) across the entire discount term. This is also called _accrual basis_. As savings plans are applied to covered usage, the costs for that savings plan appear as usage charges. The unused portion appears as a fee on the accrual date. Not all one-time fees are amortized across the billing period. For example, the unused portion of an RI Fee always appears on the first of the month.

Reviewer: > accrual date

Is the reader expected to know what "accrual date" means? Is it the date that a payment was applied?

Reviewer: The sentence starting "Not all one-time fees..." feels like it could be a second short paragraph.

Reviewer: What is an "RI Fee"?

**Note:** Data can take up to 48 to 72 hours after setup to stabilize in Datadog.

## Cost types

Visualize your ingested data using out-of-the-box cost types. Cloud cost metric names contain various terms that describe how they are calculated.

### On-demand
**On-demand** costs are the costs of usage at the public, on-demand rate published by AWS. This excludes all savings plans, reservations, discounts, taxes, and fees.

> On-demand costs do not accurately represent what you pay AWS. Do not use this metric to estimate your actual costs.

Author: I didn't want to introduce the term "unblended" here yet, and I think this edited sentence is kind of confusing. In this section, I try to provide light guidance, not a complete description with all caveats. Are you concerned about saying "they do not reflect actual costs" when in some cases they do?

What about something like:

In most cases, on-demand costs are not a reliable source to estimate actual costs.

> These costs do not provide an accurate representation of what is paid to AWS, so it's not recommended to use this metric in most cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On-demand costs do not accurately represent what you pay AWS. Do not use this metric to estimate your actual costs.
```

> ### Amortized vs. unblended costs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Amortized and unblended costs
```

> **Amortized** cost metrics distribute some pre-payments (such as up-front savings plan fees) across the entire discount term. This is also called _accrual basis_. As savings plans are applied to covered usage, the costs for that savings plan appear as usage charges. The unused portion appears as a fee.

Author: agree on both counts 
- i will switch to "cost basis"
- reworded your edit a bit, lmk if it makes sense.

> **Amortized** cost metrics distribute some pre-payments (such as up-front savings plan fees) across the entire discount term. This is also called _accrual basis_. As savings plans are applied to covered usage, the costs for that savings plan appear as usage charges. The unused portion appears as a fee.

Author: with this edit, maybe i will delete the next paragraph, which I think is now confusing after this description.

> **Amortized** cost metrics distribute some pre-payments (like up-front savings plan fees) across the entire discount term. This is also called _accrual basis_. As savings plans are applied to covered usage, the costs for that savings plan appear as usage charges. The unused portion appears as a fee.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Amortized** cost metrics distribute some pre-payments (such as up-front savings plan fees) across the entire discount term. Another name for amortized cost metrics is _accrual basis_. As savings plans are applied to covered usage, the costs for that savings plan appear as usage charges. The unused portion appears as a fee.
```

Author: Not sure about this one, since we actually don't call this anywhere in our own product... it's more like "this type of cost reporting is also known as accrual basis / cash basis".

Reviewer 2: Got it. Thanks for explaining.

> Not all one-time fees are amortized across the billing period. For example, the unused portion of a Reserved Instance Fee is typically backdated to the first of the month.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> **Unblended** cost metrics show all charges on the date that they were incurred. This is also called _cash basis_. These metrics match the AWS invoice exactly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Unblended** cost metrics show all charges on the date that they are incurred. Another name for unblended cost metrics is _cash basis_. These metrics match the AWS invoice exactly.
```

> **Unblended** cost metrics show all charges on the date that they are incurred. This is also called _cash basis_. These metrics match the AWS invoice exactly once a month is finalized.

Author: ```suggestion
**Unblended** cost metrics show all charges on the date that they are incurred. This is also called _cost basis_. These metrics match the AWS invoice exactly after a month is finalized.
```

### Net costs
**Net** costs apply private discounts directly to usage. The cost of usage for a specific resource represents the effective cost after all savings are realized.

> Non-net metrics show private discounts as separate, negative-valued line items with no attribution tags. Rather than attributing the discounts to actual usage, they are treated as offsets to total cost.

Author: @urseberry  Tried to reword this a bit. Had some feedback that "non-net" is not really a term we want to introduce since it's a bit confusing. Wdyt?

> Non-net metrics show private discounts as separate, negative-valued line items with no attribution tags. Rather than attributing the discounts to actual usage, they are treated as offsets to total cost.

Reviewer 2: Yes, your latest wording looks great.

> Other metrics (without the `net` keyword) show private discounts as separate, negative-valued line items with no attribution tags. Rather than attributing the discounts to actual usage, they are treated as offsets to total cost.

Reviewer 3: <!-- Thoughts represent an idea that popped up from reviewing. These comments are non-blocking by nature, but they are extremely valuable and can lead to more focused initiatives and mentoring opportunities.  -->
**💭 thought:** ‏Perhaps we should refrain of talking about keywords and suffixes. I believe our overall goal is to hide the name of the metrics (once we migrate the new searchbar to dashboards).
If we don't have a better solution now, we can revisit that later

Author: great point, I will try to revise this. I will leave the full metric names in the Metric Summary table for now, and we can modify that when they're no longer visible if we want.

Though, I'm guessing you will still see them in string-query edit mode?

> In contrast, other metrics show private discounts as separate, negative-valued line items with no attribution tags. Rather than attributing the discounts directly to usage, those metrics subtract discounts from the total cost.

Author: i think `some` is still a good edit, though I did initially mean resource id attribution.

**Net amortized** costs provide the most accurate representation for cost allocation, with all savings applied directly to usage. Net cost metrics are available if your AWS account has privately negotiated enterprise discounts. If your account doesn't have net metrics available, use **amortized** cost instead.

### Container allocation
**Container allocation** metrics contain all of the same costs as the AWS metrics, but with additional breakdowns and insights for container workloads. See [container cost allocation][11] for more details.

### Example
Here is an example scenario to demonstrate how these cost types behave. Imagine you have:
- an EC2 instance running for one hour with the cost of $3/compute-hour.
- a savings plan which covers this instance type and hour purchased for $2.

> - a negotiated discount of 10% on top of all other discounts.

Author: Your interpretation is correct, though i was trying to skip over the complexity of "purchased at a cost of $X". Updated to remove - does it make sense?

> - a negotiated discount of 10% on top of all other discounts.

Reviewer 2: Yes, it makes sense, thanks!

| `aws.cost.net.amortized` | Net amortized costs, without container cost breakdowns. |
| `aws.cost.net.unblended` | Net unblended costs, without container cost breakdowns. Matches the AWS invoice, with specialized discounts pre-calculated within usage costs. |
| `aws.cost.amortized.shared.resources.allocated` | All of your AWS amortized costs, with additional breakdowns and insights for container workloads. Requires [container cost allocation][11].|
| `aws.cost.amortized` | Amortized costs, without container cost breakdowns. |
| `aws.cost.unblended` | Unblended costs, without container cost breakdowns. Matches the AWS invoice. |
| `aws.cost.ondemand`  | Costs based on the list rate provided by AWS, excluding all savings plans, reservations, discounts, taxes, and fees. |

## Tag enrichment

Datadog adds tags to the ingested cost data using many sources, described in detail below.

- Cost and Usage Report columns
- AWS Resource tags
- AWS Account tags
- AWS Integration tags
- Out-of-the-box tags
- Container workload tags
- Tag pipelines

### Cost and Usage Report columns

All string-valued columns from the AWS [Cost and Usage Report (CUR)][6] are added as tags on cost metrics.

> To ensure consistency, Datadog normalizes tag keys using underscores and lower case. For example, the CUR column `lineItem/resourceId` maps to the tag key `line_item/resource_id`. Tag values are generally unmodified - maintaining exact casing and most special characters.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To ensure consistency, Datadog normalizes tag keys using underscores and lower case. For example, the CUR column `lineItem/ResourceId` maps to the tag key `line_item/resource_id`. Tag values are generally unmodified - maintaining exact casing and most special characters.
```

**Examples:**

|CUR Column|CUR Value|Cloud Cost Tag|
|---|---|---|

> |lineItem/resourceId|i-12345678a9b12cd3e|line_item/resource_id:i-12345678a9b12cd3e|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|lineItem/ResourceId|i-12345678a9b12cd3e|line_item/resource_id:i-12345678a9b12cd3e|
```

|product/region|us-east-1|product/region:us-east-1|
|product/usagetype|DataTransfer-Regional-Bytes|product/usagetype:DataTransfer-Regional-Bytes|

### AWS resource tags

[AWS resource tags][12] are user-defined tags that appear in the AWS console when viewing a particular resource, like an EC2 instance or S3 bucket.

> When the Datadog AWS integration is enabled, Datadog automatically collects resource tags for most AWS resources. These tags are applied to all costs found in the CUR for a given resource. Resource tags are retrieved regularly and are applied to cost data starting from the day they are created or modified. Historical tag values are not overwritten when tags change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you enable the Datadog AWS integration, Datadog automatically collects resource tags for most AWS resources. These tags are applied to all costs found in the CUR for a given resource. Resource tags are retrieved regularly and are applied to cost data starting from the day they are created or modified. Historical tag values are not overwritten when tags change.
```

If the AWS integration is not enabled, you can enable resource tag enrichment by activating [cost allocation tags][13] in AWS billing. This allows you to select a subset of resource tag keys to include as columns in the AWS CUR. Datadog automatically includes those columns as tags when processing the CUR.

### AWS organization and account tags

> AWS Organizations supports [user-defined tags][14] on organizational units and accounts. Datadog automatically fetches and applies these tags to cost data. Account tags are applied to all usage associated with those accounts. Organization tags are applied to all billing data for the matching payer account.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
AWS Organizations support [user-defined tags][14] on organizational units and accounts. Datadog automatically fetches and applies these tags to cost data. Account tags are applied to all usage associated with those accounts. Organization tags are applied to all billing data for the matching payer account.
```

_Requires the Datadog AWS Integration on the organization account._

### AWS integration tags

> These are tags set on the AWS Integration tile in the Datadog integrations page. They are applied to all costs found in the CUR for the associated AWS account.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
AWS integration tags are tags set on the AWS Integration tile in the Datadog integrations page. They are applied to all costs found in the CUR for the associated AWS account.
```

| elb (application, gateway, network) | `loadbalancer`|
| elb (all other costs) | `loadbalancername` |

### Container orchestrators

> Container cost allocation adds tags from the workloads incurring cost. This includes tags from Kubernetes pods and nodes and ECS tasks and containers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Container cost allocation adds tags from the workloads incurring cost. Examples include tags from Kubernetes pods and nodes and ECS tasks and containers.
```

> _Requires [container cost allocation][11], and applies only to shared.resources.allocated metrics._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Requires [container cost allocation][11], and applies only to `shared.resources.allocated` metrics._
```
